Documentation/reference/os/wqueue.rst, before:

===========
Work Queues
===========

**Work Queues**. NuttX provides *work queues*. Work queues are
threads that service a queue of work items to be performed. They
are useful for off-loading work to a different threading context,
for delayed processing, or for serializing activities.

Classes of Work Queues
======================

There are three different classes of work queues, each with
different properties and intended usage. These classes of work
queues along with the common work queue interface are described in
the following paragraphs.

High Priority Kernel Work queue
-------------------------------

The dedicated high-priority
work queue is intended to handle delayed processing from interrupt
handlers. This work queue is required for some drivers but, if
there are no complaints, can be safely disabled. The high priority
worker thread also performs garbage collection -- completing any
delayed memory deallocations from interrupt handlers. If the
high-priority worker thread is disabled, then that clean up will
be performed either by (1) the low-priority worker thread, if
enabled, and if not (2) the IDLE thread instead (which runs at the
lowest of priority and may not be appropriate if memory
reclamation is of high priority)

**Device Driver Bottom Half**. The high-priority worker thread is
intended to serve as the *bottom half* for device drivers. As a
consequence it must run at a very high, fixed priority rivalling
the priority of the interrupt handler itself. Typically, the high
priority work queue should be the highest priority thread in your
system (the default priority is 224).

**Thread Pool**. The work queues can be configured to support
multiple, low-priority threads. This is essentially a *thread
pool* that provides multi-threaded servicing of the queue work.
This breaks the strict serialization of the "queue" (and hence,
the work queue is no longer a queue at all).

Multiple worker threads are required to support, for example, I/O
operations that stall waiting for input. If there is only a single
thread, then the entire work queue processing would stall in such
cases. Such behavior is necessary to support asynchronous I/O,
AIO, for example.

**Compared to the Low Priority Kernel Work Queue**. For less
critical, lower priority, application oriented worker thread
support, consider enabling the lower priority work queue. The
lower priority work queue runs at a lower priority, of course, but
has the added advantage that it supports *priority inheritance*
(if ``CONFIG_PRIORITY_INHERITANCE=y`` is also selected): The
priority of the lower priority worker thread can then be adjusted
to match the highest priority client.

**Configuration Options**.

-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPWORK``. Enables the high priority work queue.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPNTHREADS``. The number of threads in the
   high-priority queue's thread pool. Default: 1
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPWORKPRIORITY``. The execution priority of the
   high-priority worker thread. Default: 224
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPWORKSTACKSIZE``. The stack size allocated for
   the worker thread in bytes. Default: 2048.

Low Priority Kernel Work Queue
------------------------------

This lower priority work queue
is better suited for more extended, application oriented
processing such as file system clean-up, memory garbage collection
and asynchronous I/O operations.

**Compared to the High Priority Work Queue**. The lower priority
work queue runs at a lower priority than the high priority work
queue, of course, and so is inappropriate to serve as a driver
*bottom half*. It is, otherwise, very similar to the high priority
work queue and most of the discussion above for the high priority
work queue applies equally here. The lower priority work queue does
have one important property, however, that makes it better suited
for some tasks:

**Priority Inheritance**. The lower priority worker thread(s)
support *priority inheritance* (if <config>
CONFIG_PRIORITY_INHERITANCE is also selected): The priority of the
lower priority worker thread can then be adjusted to match the
highest priority client.

   **NOTE:** This priority inheritance feature is not automatic.
   The lower priority worker thread will always have a fixed
   priority unless additional logic calls
   ``lpwork_boostpriority()`` to raise the priority of the lower
   priority worker thread (typically called before scheduling the
   work) and then calls the matching ``lpwork_restorepriority()``
   when the work is completed (typically called within the work
   handler at the completion of the work). Currently, only the
   NuttX asynchronous I/O logic uses this dynamic prioritization
   feature.

The higher priority worker thread, on the other hand, is intended
to serve as the *bottom half* for device drivers. As a consequence
must run at a very high, fixed priority. Typically, it should be
the highest priority thread in your system.

**Configuration Options**.

-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORK``. If CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORK is selected
   then a lower-priority work queue will be enabled.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPNTHREADS``. The number of threads in the
   low-priority queue's thread pool. Default: 1
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIORITY``. The minimum execution priority
   of the lower priority worker thread. The priority of the all
   worker threads start at this priority. If priority inheritance
   is in effect, the priority may be boosted from this level.
   Default: 50.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIOMAX``. The maximum execution priority
   of the lower priority worker thread. Lower priority worker
   threads will be started at ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIORITY`` but
   their priority may be boosted due to priority inheritance. The
   boosted priority of the low priority worker thread will not,
   however, ever exceed ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIOMAX``. This limit
   would be necessary, for example, if the higher priority worker
   thread were to defer work to the lower priority thread.
   Clearly, in such a case, you would want to limit the maximum
   priority of the lower priority work thread. Default: 176.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKSTACKSIZE``. The stack size allocated for
   the lower priority worker thread. Default: 2048.

User-Mode Work Queue
--------------------

**Work Queue Accessibility**. The high- and low-priority worker
threads are kernel-mode threads. In the normal, *flat* NuttX
build, these work queues are useful to application code and
may be shared. However, in the NuttX protected and kernel build
modes, kernel mode code is isolated and cannot be accessed from
user-mode code.

**User-Mode Work Queue**. if either ``CONFIG_BUILD_PROTECTED`` or
``CONFIG_BUILD_KERNEL`` are selected, then the option to enable a
special user-mode work queue is enabled. The interface to the user-
mode work queue is identical to that of the kernel-mode work queues
and the user-mode work queue is functionally equivalent to the high
priority work queue. It differs in that its implementation does not
depend on internal, kernel-space facilities.

**Configuration Options**.

-  ``CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORK``. If CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORK is also defined
   then the user-mode work queue will be enabled.
-  ``CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORKPRIORITY``. The execution priority of the
   user-mode priority worker thread. Default: 100
-  ``CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORKSTACKSIZE``. The stack size allocated for
   the lower priority worker thread. Default: 2048.

Common Work Queue Interfaces
============================

Work Queue IDs
--------------

**Work queue IDs**. All work queues use the identical interface
functions (at least identical in terms of the function
*signature*). The first parameter passed to the work queue
interface function identifies the work queue:

**Kernel-Mode Work Queue IDs:**

-  ``HPWORK``. This ID of the high priority work queue that should
   only be used for high-priority, time-critical, driver bottom-half
   functions.
-  ``LPWORK``. This is the ID of the low priority work queue that
   can be used for any purpose. If ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORK`` is not
   defined, then there is only one kernel work queue and
   ``LPWORK`` is equal to ``HPWORK``.

**User-Mode Work Queue IDs:**

-  ``USRWORK``. This is the ID of the user-mode work queue that
   can be used for any purpose by applications. In a flat build,
   ``USRWORK`` is equal to ``LPWORK`` so that user applications
   will use the lower priority work queue (if there is one).

Work Queue Interface Types
--------------------------

-  ``typedef void (*worker_t)(FAR void *arg);`` Defines the type
   of the work callback.
-  ``struct work_s``. Defines one entry in the work queue. This is
   a client-allocated structure. Work queue clients should not
   reference any field in this structure since they are subject to
   change. The user only needs this structure in order to declare
   instances of the work structure. Handling of all fields is
   performed by the work queue interfaces described below.

Work Queue Interfaces
---------------------

.. c:function:: int work_queue(int qid, FAR struct work_s *work, worker_t worker, \
               FAR void *arg, uint32_t delay)

  Queue work to be performed at a later time. All
  queued work will be performed on the worker thread of execution
  (not the caller's).

  The work structure is allocated and must be initialized to all
  zero by the caller. Otherwise, the work structure is completely
  managed by the work queue logic. The caller should never modify
  the contents of the work queue structure directly. If
  ``work_queue()`` is called before the previous work has been
  performed and removed from the queue, then any pending work will
  be canceled and lost.

  :param qid: The work queue ID.
  :param work: The work structure to queue
  :param worker: The worker callback to be invoked. The callback
    will be invoked on the worker thread of execution.

  :param arg: The argument that will be passed to the worker
    callback function when it is invoked.

  :param delay: Delay (in system clock ticks) from the time queue
    until the worker is invoked. Zero means to perform the work
    immediately.

  :return: Zero is returned on success; a negated errno is returned on failure.

.. c:function:: int work_cancel(int qid, FAR struct work_s *work)

  Cancel previously queued work. This removes work
  from the work queue. After work has been cancelled, it may be
  re-queued by calling ``work_queue()`` again.

  :param qid: The work queue ID.
  :param work: The previously queued work structure to cancel.

  :return: Zero is returned on success; a negated ``errno`` is returned on
    failure.

    -  ``ENOENT``: There is no such work queued.
    -  ``EINVAL``: An invalid work queue was specified.

.. c:function:: int work_signal(int qid)

  Signal the worker thread to process the work
  queue now. This function is used internally by the work logic but
  could also be used by the user to force an immediate re-assessment
  of pending work.

  :param qid: The work queue ID.

  :return: Zero is returned on success; a negated errno is returned on failure.

.. c:function:: bool work_available(FAR struct work_s *work)

  Check if the work structure is available.

  :param work: The work queue structure to check.

  :return: ``true`` if available; ``false`` if busy (i.e., there is still pending work).

.. c:function:: int work_usrstart(void)

  The function is only available as a user
  interface in the kernel-mode build. In the flat build, there is no
  user-mode work queue; in the protected mode, the user-mode work
  queue will automatically be started by the OS start-up code. But
  in the kernel mode, each user process will be required to start is
  own, private instance of the user-mode work thread using this
  interface.

  :return: The task ID of the worker thread is returned on success.
    A negated ``errno`` value is returned on failure.

.. c:function:: void lpwork_boostpriority(uint8_t reqprio)

  Called by the work queue client to assure that
  the priority of the low-priority worker thread is at least at the
  requested level, ``reqprio``. This function would normally be
  called just before calling ``work_queue()``.

  :param reqprio: Requested minimum worker thread priority.

.. c:function:: void lpwork_restorepriority(uint8_t reqprio)

  This function is called to restore the priority
  after it was previously boosted. This is often done by client
  logic on the worker thread when the scheduled work completes. It
  will check if we need to drop the priority of the worker thread.

  :param reqprio: Previously requested minimum worker thread
    priority to be "unboosted".

Commit message:

fs/fatfs: Replace semaphore with mutex for locking
Change-Id: I69611ba10e9eb32f80a08b4805fccb754e7f7c3a

Documentation/reference/os/wqueue.rst, after:

===========
Work Queues
===========

**Work Queues**. NuttX provides *work queues*. Work queues are
threads that service a queue of work items to be performed. They
are useful for off-loading work to a different threading context,
for delayed processing, or for serializing activities.

Classes of Work Queues
======================

There are three different classes of work queues, each with
different properties and intended usage. These classes of work
queues along with the common work queue interface are described in
the following paragraphs.

High Priority Kernel Work queue
-------------------------------

The dedicated high-priority
work queue is intended to handle delayed processing from interrupt
handlers. This work queue is required for some drivers but, if
there are no complaints, can be safely disabled. The high priority
worker thread also performs garbage collection -- completing any
delayed memory deallocations from interrupt handlers. If the
high-priority worker thread is disabled, then that clean up will
be performed either by (1) the low-priority worker thread, if
enabled, and if not (2) the IDLE thread instead (which runs at the
lowest of priority and may not be appropriate if memory
reclamation is of high priority)

**Device Driver Bottom Half**. The high-priority worker thread is
intended to serve as the *bottom half* for device drivers. As a
consequence it must run at a very high, fixed priority rivalling
the priority of the interrupt handler itself. Typically, the high
priority work queue should be the highest priority thread in your
system (the default priority is 224).

**Thread Pool**. The work queues can be configured to support
multiple, low-priority threads. This is essentially a *thread
pool* that provides multi-threaded servicing of the queue work.
This breaks the strict serialization of the "queue" (and hence,
the work queue is no longer a queue at all).

Multiple worker threads are required to support, for example, I/O
operations that stall waiting for input. If there is only a single
thread, then the entire work queue processing would stall in such
cases. Such behavior is necessary to support asynchronous I/O,
AIO, for example.

**Compared to the Low Priority Kernel Work Queue**. For less
critical, lower priority, application oriented worker thread
support, consider enabling the lower priority work queue. The
lower priority work queue runs at a lower priority, of course, but
has the added advantage that it supports *priority inheritance*
(if ``CONFIG_PRIORITY_INHERITANCE=y`` is also selected): The
priority of the lower priority worker thread can then be adjusted
to match the highest priority client.

**Configuration Options**.

-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPWORK``. Enables the high priority work queue.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPNTHREADS``. The number of threads in the
   high-priority queue's thread pool. Default: 1
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPWORKPRIORITY``. The execution priority of the
   high-priority worker thread. Default: 224
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_HPWORKSTACKSIZE``. The stack size allocated for
   the worker thread in bytes. Default: 2048.

**Common Configuration Options**. These options apply to all work
queues:

-  ``CONFIG_SIG_SIGWORK`` The signal number that will be used to
   wake-up the worker thread. This same signal is used with various
   internal worker threads.
   Default: 17

Low Priority Kernel Work Queue
------------------------------

This lower priority work queue
is better suited for more extended, application oriented
processing such as file system clean-up, memory garbage collection
and asynchronous I/O operations.

**Compared to the High Priority Work Queue**. The lower priority
work queue runs at a lower priority than the high priority work
queue, of course, and so is inappropriate to serve as a driver
*bottom half*. It is, otherwise, very similar to the high priority
work queue and most of the discussion above for the high priority
work queue applies equally here. The lower priority work queue does
have one important property, however, that makes it better suited
for some tasks:

**Priority Inheritance**. The lower priority worker thread(s)
support *priority inheritance* (if <config>
CONFIG_PRIORITY_INHERITANCE is also selected): The priority of the
lower priority worker thread can then be adjusted to match the
highest priority client.

   **NOTE:** This priority inheritance feature is not automatic.
   The lower priority worker thread will always have a fixed
   priority unless additional logic calls
   ``lpwork_boostpriority()`` to raise the priority of the lower
   priority worker thread (typically called before scheduling the
   work) and then calls the matching ``lpwork_restorepriority()``
   when the work is completed (typically called within the work
   handler at the completion of the work). Currently, only the
   NuttX asynchronous I/O logic uses this dynamic prioritization
   feature.

The higher priority worker thread, on the other hand, is intended
to serve as the *bottom half* for device drivers. As a consequence
must run at a very high, fixed priority. Typically, it should be
the highest priority thread in your system.

**Configuration Options**.

-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORK``. If CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORK is selected
   then a lower-priority work queue will be enabled.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPNTHREADS``. The number of threads in the
   low-priority queue's thread pool. Default: 1
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIORITY``. The minimum execution priority
   of the lower priority worker thread. The priority of the all
   worker threads start at this priority. If priority inheritance
   is in effect, the priority may be boosted from this level.
   Default: 50.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIOMAX``. The maximum execution priority
   of the lower priority worker thread. Lower priority worker
   threads will be started at ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIORITY`` but
   their priority may be boosted due to priority inheritance. The
   boosted priority of the low priority worker thread will not,
   however, ever exceed ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKPRIOMAX``. This limit
   would be necessary, for example, if the higher priority worker
   thread were to defer work to the lower priority thread.
   Clearly, in such a case, you would want to limit the maximum
   priority of the lower priority work thread. Default: 176.
-  ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORKSTACKSIZE``. The stack size allocated for
   the lower priority worker thread. Default: 2048.

User-Mode Work Queue
--------------------

**Work Queue Accessibility**. The high- and low-priority worker
threads are kernel-mode threads. In the normal, *flat* NuttX
build, these work queues are useful to application code and
may be shared. However, in the NuttX protected and kernel build
modes, kernel mode code is isolated and cannot be accessed from
user-mode code.

**User-Mode Work Queue**. if either ``CONFIG_BUILD_PROTECTED`` or
``CONFIG_BUILD_KERNEL`` are selected, then the option to enable a
special user-mode work queue is enabled. The interface to the user-
mode work queue is identical to that of the kernel-mode work queues
and the user-mode work queue is functionally equivalent to the high
priority work queue. It differs in that its implementation does not
depend on internal, kernel-space facilities.

**Configuration Options**.

-  ``CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORK``. If CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORK is also defined
   then the user-mode work queue will be enabled.
-  ``CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORKPRIORITY``. The execution priority of the
   user-mode priority worker thread. Default: 100
-  ``CONFIG_LIBC_USRWORKSTACKSIZE``. The stack size allocated for
   the lower priority worker thread. Default: 2048.

Common Work Queue Interfaces
============================

Work Queue IDs
--------------

**Work queue IDs**. All work queues use the identical interface
functions (at least identical in terms of the function
*signature*). The first parameter passed to the work queue
interface function identifies the work queue:

**Kernel-Mode Work Queue IDs:**

-  ``HPWORK``. This ID of the high priority work queue that should
   only be used for high-priority, time-critical, driver bottom-half
   functions.
-  ``LPWORK``. This is the ID of the low priority work queue that
   can be used for any purpose. If ``CONFIG_SCHED_LPWORK`` is not
   defined, then there is only one kernel work queue and
   ``LPWORK`` is equal to ``HPWORK``.

**User-Mode Work Queue IDs:**

-  ``USRWORK``. This is the ID of the user-mode work queue that
   can be used for any purpose by applications. In a flat build,
   ``USRWORK`` is equal to ``LPWORK`` so that user applications
   will use the lower priority work queue (if there is one).

Work Queue Interface Types
--------------------------

-  ``typedef void (*worker_t)(FAR void *arg);`` Defines the type
   of the work callback.
-  ``struct work_s``. Defines one entry in the work queue. This is
   a client-allocated structure. Work queue clients should not
   reference any field in this structure since they are subject to
   change. The user only needs this structure in order to declare
   instances of the work structure. Handling of all fields is
   performed by the work queue interfaces described below.

Work Queue Interfaces
---------------------

.. c:function:: int work_queue(int qid, FAR struct work_s *work, worker_t worker, \
               FAR void *arg, uint32_t delay)

  Queue work to be performed at a later time. All
  queued work will be performed on the worker thread of execution
  (not the caller's).

  The work structure is allocated and must be initialized to all
  zero by the caller. Otherwise, the work structure is completely
  managed by the work queue logic. The caller should never modify
  the contents of the work queue structure directly. If
  ``work_queue()`` is called before the previous work has been
  performed and removed from the queue, then any pending work will
  be canceled and lost.

  :param qid: The work queue ID.
  :param work: The work structure to queue
  :param worker: The worker callback to be invoked. The callback
    will be invoked on the worker thread of execution.

  :param arg: The argument that will be passed to the worker
    callback function when it is invoked.

  :param delay: Delay (in system clock ticks) from the time queue
    until the worker is invoked. Zero means to perform the work
    immediately.

  :return: Zero is returned on success; a negated errno is returned on failure.

.. c:function:: int work_cancel(int qid, FAR struct work_s *work)

  Cancel previously queued work. This removes work
  from the work queue. After work has been cancelled, it may be
  re-queued by calling ``work_queue()`` again.

  :param qid: The work queue ID.
  :param work: The previously queued work structure to cancel.

  :return: Zero is returned on success; a negated ``errno`` is returned on
    failure.

    -  ``ENOENT``: There is no such work queued.
    -  ``EINVAL``: An invalid work queue was specified.

.. c:function:: int work_signal(int qid)

  Signal the worker thread to process the work
  queue now. This function is used internally by the work logic but
  could also be used by the user to force an immediate re-assessment
  of pending work.

  :param qid: The work queue ID.

  :return: Zero is returned on success; a negated errno is returned on failure.

.. c:function:: bool work_available(FAR struct work_s *work)

  Check if the work structure is available.

  :param work: The work queue structure to check.

  :return: ``true`` if available; ``false`` if busy (i.e., there is still pending work).

.. c:function:: int work_usrstart(void)

  The function is only available as a user
  interface in the kernel-mode build. In the flat build, there is no
  user-mode work queue; in the protected mode, the user-mode work
  queue will automatically be started by the OS start-up code. But
  in the kernel mode, each user process will be required to start is
  own, private instance of the user-mode work thread using this
  interface.

  :return: The task ID of the worker thread is returned on success.
    A negated ``errno`` value is returned on failure.

.. c:function:: void lpwork_boostpriority(uint8_t reqprio)

  Called by the work queue client to assure that
  the priority of the low-priority worker thread is at least at the
  requested level, ``reqprio``. This function would normally be
  called just before calling ``work_queue()``.

  :param reqprio: Requested minimum worker thread priority.

.. c:function:: void lpwork_restorepriority(uint8_t reqprio)

  This function is called to restore the priority
  after it was previously boosted. This is often done by client
  logic on the worker thread when the scheduled work completes. It
  will check if we need to drop the priority of the worker thread.

  :param reqprio: Previously requested minimum worker thread
    priority to be "unboosted".
